>> Archetypes are like the
keys to your own mystery.
They're the lens through
which you understand
what motivates you,
why are you attracted
to that person and not this.
They explain who you are.
Before I define
the word archetype,
let me toss out a question.
Why do you think you enjoy
people watching so much?
And I won't even bother to ask
you if you people watch, like
from a cafe or from
outside your house,
because I know we all do.
We can't stop ourselves.
And here's something
else we can't stop,
and that's labeling
the people we watch.
We're compulsive about
having to tell ourselves
at least one thing about each
person we stop to notice.
I mean, we'll say
something like,
that person looks like
a typical entrepreneur,
or I bet that woman is
a compulsive shopper,
or I bet that
person is an addict,
or maybe that person
is like a dancer,
because I can tell by how
he or she moves their body.
But what you may not
know is why we're
compulsive about labeling.
And what you are actually
doing is a reading,
like an archetypal
reading, or intuiting
an obvious archetypal
pattern in that person.
And get this, amazingly,
while you're reading them,
they're reading you.
A con artist, for example,
can sense a victim.
Have you ever wondered how
come con artists always
find their victims?
Addicts always manage
to find addicts.
Knights can sense and
find a damsel in distress.
The fact is we seek
out archetypal patterns
that we're naturally attracted
to, like magnetic codes.
Even though we
don't think, I think
I'll go look for an
archetypal pattern
that I'm attracted to,
we don't think that way,
because it's unconscious.
But there's magnetics
between us that archetypes
resonate with and even radiate.
We each have four
survival archetypes
in common and eight
unique archetypes
that together, form
our individual nature.
You were born with 12
archetypal patterns that
would, through the
years of your life,
develop into the
characteristics of who you are.
The four archetypes that
we share are related
to our earthly challenge of
survival and to the essential
discovery of our self-esteem--
the child, victim,
prostitute, and saboteur.
The other eight
define our uniqueness.
In my research, the
consistent pattern
I've seen that even
though there are
endless archetypes in the
collective unconscious,
each of us has a family of
12 intimate archetypes that
govern our life path.
And while this may sound like
an incredible new idea to you,
the fact is you've already met
a number of your own archetypes.
You already know them.
You know them in the language
that you think about yourself.
If I asked you to
describe yourself to me,
you would pull out
your archetypes.
You would say, well,
you know, I'm a wife.
I'm a husband.
I'm an introvert.
I'm an extrovert.
I'm a natural networker.
I like to be of service.
You would absolutely
describe yourself
by labels or archetypes.
And you would assume
in this description
that I would understand all
the characteristics that
go with the one word
you use, because that's
what an archetype is.
Let me give you
a big definition.
Because an archetype
is a pattern of power
that we all just
automatically understand,
it transfers a language
that we just get in our gut.
So if I said to you, you know
what, that person's a geek,
I don't have to say to you that
person just gets technology
and is everything I'm not.
I am so not a geek.
That is so not me,
because I don't
have one geek archetype in me.
But I look at
these young people,
who have the geek in them,
and it comes naturally.
And that's what an archetype is.
It's a pattern that's in
you, that comes naturally,
that animates you, and it
gives you natural qualities
that go along with it.
But an archetype
does something else.
It's filled with
stories that go with it.
Like for example, the
princess archetype
has a huge backlog of stories
that go with the princess,
like Snow White and
all the many stories we
have about princesses.
They have to have a knight,
and they have to be rescued.
It has to be romantic.
We all know that, because
that's how the book is written.
When a woman has a
princess archetype,
she automatically
thinks in the language
in the story of a princess,
and she unconsciously
looks for a knight.
Detectives do something
called profiling when it
comes to looking for criminals.
Profiling is another way
to think of archetypes.
They profile, for
example, serial killers.
And that is profiling
archetypal patterns of people
who murder in certain ways.
But what they're
actually doing is
they're charting the archetypal
pattern of a person's
certain behavior that
they can count on.
And here's the
thing, what they say
is this is the pattern
of this person.
And then that pattern
will be duplicated.
Now, it's an odd thing to use
a serial killer as an example,
but here's the thing.
It's because it is a form
in our society, where
the archetype has
become something
that an entire
agency relies upon.
And what they know is that
a pattern is consistent.
And that's the thing
that makes it a pattern
just like it is in us.
Our archetypes are
absolutely consistent.
It's what makes us who we are.
So one of the things that's
so fascinating about watching
these detective movies is
that people are fascinated
with the consistency of the
archetypes in those dramas,
because they're
looking at the patterns
and how they chart patterns.
And that's what is part of
the success of these stories.
In my research as a medical
intuitive, after 35 years,
it became evident to me that
we have patterns of power that
influence our behavior and
that those patterns are
so consistent in
us and that there
are 12 fundamental
currents that duplicate
the order of the universe, that
there's 12 signs of the zodiac,
there's 12 hours in the day,
there's 12 hours of the night.
12 is like a cycle
of completion.
So 12 kind of completes us, and
there's 12 major power patterns
in each of us that kind of
guide the journey of who we are.
And each of these power
patterns has a role
to play in who we are and who
we are, so that each of us
has a child
archetype, each of us
has a victim we have
to contend with.
We have 12 archetypes, and
these kind of direct the way
in which we develop
in our lives.
We're not free floating agents.
We're quite governed
here in life.
It as if we have what I
have called for years,
a sacred contract with them.
And see if you can
relate to this.
You know, when you're dating,
and if you are dating,
so you pay attention to
me here, because you're
going to need to know this.
When people date, they
don't take all 12 archetypes
on a date with them.
You tend to take your
three or four best
archetypes out on a date.
Like, you may take
happy child out.
You might take the archetypes
in you that you feel best in.
Say that you're
a healer, and you
really like that
part of yourself,
and you love to
talk about healing.
You might take
your networker out,
because you know exactly
how to be in the world.
You might take your extrovert
if you're an extrovert.
The parts of yourself that
you feel very confident in.
But let's say, let's
say, that you also
happen to be a gambler, and
you had a gambler archetype,
and you weren't yet sure how
to work with your gambler
in a positive way, like how
to play hunches in a good way,
because the gambler is
a real positive side.
But let's just say
you weren't there yet.
And you thought,
this isn't the time
to tell this person
I'm a gambler,
and you decided
this isn't the time
to tell this person I'm like
a great big huge addict.
So you leave those
archetypes at home.
And you just go out with
your magical child archetype.
And when you're
dating this person,
the other person thinks, this
is the most perfect person
I have ever met in
the whole of my life.
And then you get married.
Archetypes are also collective.
Marriage is an archetype.
And so from the time
someone gets married,
that archetype kicks in,
and the marriage archetype
is actually undergoing a
transformation right now.
But here's the thing.
The marriage archetype
is about survival.
It is an archetype that is all
about the survival of a family,
of a tribe.
It's about security.
It's about creating a nest
to procreate and to make
sure a tribe survives.
Marriage archetype was
never about romance.
This may blow you away,
but it's the truth.
The archetype goes way
back, way back, a long time.
Marriages were arranged long
before they were courtshipped
and dated about love, where
individuals could decide
to get married on their own.
Even today, a lot of
marriages are still arranged,
because they're about survival.
So when people get married,
what happens in the collective
unconscious-- and believe
you me, this happens--
is that all 12 of your
archetypes come out with all 12
of the other archetypes.
And how often does it happen
that two people will suddenly
feel when they get married
and show up in their apartment
together, that it's awfully
psychically crowded in here?
Like, who is this
person I married?
And what happens today is that
people start talking like this,
I need my own space.
I feel like-- this person
is crowding my territory.
I need more room here.
And it's a psychic
response to the crowding
in the archetypal airwaves.
Isn't that amazing?
But you can relate to
this because we are now
living in a time where
our unconscious is
becoming conscious.
We're becoming very
much aware of relating
to each other
energetically, of feeling
each other's energetic content,
the content of our energy
field.
So let me get
personal with you now,
as if that wasn't
personal enough.
Let me get real personal.
How many of you are in
the healing profession?
When I'm teaching,
and I will ask
in an audience, how many
of you are in the healing
profession, honestly these
days, 40, 50% of the hands
go up, because the healer
archetype is a very prevalent
archetype today.
Now that in itself
is fascinating.
Don't you think
that's interesting?
I think it's--
I'm intrigued with it.
A great part of
the reason for that
is because we've moved into
a holistic era, an era where
healing has become an interior
art, as much as an exterior
profession.
And so the healer
archetype is all
about the intuitive
voice of the healer,
as well as the intellectual
knowledge of the healer.
So many of you who feel
or see yourself as healers
have declared yourself to be
a healer by some intuitive
knowledge of who you are.
You have a deep sense of
your archetypal pattern.
That pattern is talking to you.
Archetypes are so rich and
thorough that they actually
participate in the
events of your life.
They actually form
you, like clay.
And the healer, for
example, contains within it
the journey of the
wounded healer.
It's the initiation
of forming you
into becoming a genuine healer.
You just don't say to yourself,
you know what, I'm a healer,
and you become a healer,
as if that's something
you can just be.
The healer archetype is
something you become,
and you are formed
from the inside.
And that requires a journey.
And you may have
already been through it.
If not, you will go through it.
And I can tell you that
with absolute confidence.
Why?
Because it's the
archetypal journey.
And if you have the healer,
you will have this journey.
You can't not have
it, because it's
part of the archetype itself.
Now, though I'm going to
use the healer extensively
as an example to explain
the way archetypes
work behind the
scenes in your life,
let me be clear that all
archetypes, all of them
influence your life in
this kind of back room way.
Like, for example, the
victim or the judge
or the warrior or the servant or
the companion, they're endless.
You recognize if you
see your patterns,
you can see exactly what will
inevitably emerge in you.
And as the healer, you
will be given a wound,
like an arrow shot
through your system.
That arrow will come
into your energy field
from somewhere, which
means someone has been
anointed to shoot that arrow.
You have a contract
with this person.
This is why I called
it sacred contracts.
It is a contract.
Someone will be the wound giver
that you will have to heal.
And that wound will
be devastating,
because it has to be--
it won't be a broken leg.
It will be a soul
wound, not a body wound.
It will wound you
body, mind, heart,
and soul, because that is what
the wounded healer requires.
That is an initiatory wound.
The rescuer is an archetype
a lot of people relate to
and each of these archetypes
has patterns of development that
work behind the scenes
in you, so that you
get to know the part of you
that is the rescuer, like this.
It goes in search of rescuing
people in order to find love.
And that's the shadow
part of the rescuer,
because you're not
supposed to rescue people
in order to be loved.
You know what that's like?
That would be like
being a lifeguard who
pushes people in the pool, so
that he could go rescue them.
And then the lifeguard drags
that person out of the pool
and follows them
home and decides
to stay there, so that everyone
can say, you are so wonderful.
You rescued me
from drowning today
and then expects to have
dinner, lunch, breakfast,
and get rewards all day long.
But he pushed him in the
pool in the first place.
And then that lifeguard
can't figure out
why people stopped
going to the pool.
Looking for rewards, looking for
compliments, looking for meals.
It was a private agenda
that the lifeguard added
on that came from his shadow.
And at some point,
that lifeguard
is going to have to sit down
and say, what am I doing wrong
here?
And maybe the lifeguard
will go over to a therapist,
say, you gotta help me
out, because every time
I'm rescuing people,
they're not appreciating me.
I take them home.
We have a meal.
They thank me.
But then I show up the next
day, and pretty soon, I
get the cold shoulder.
And then, the
person says, I don't
think you're supposed
to push him in the pool.
I don't think so.
I think you're supposed
to wait until there's
a call to be rescued.
Then I think you're supposed
to dive in, pull him
to the side of the pool,
make sure they're all right,
and then get back on your perch
and wait for the next person.
That's the role of the empowered
archetype of the rescuer.
You may not know who
the participants will
be in these experiences
or when they will happen.
But what your knowledge
of your archetypes gives
you is this capacity
to be impersonal
about the personal events
that unfold in your life.
How much power is that?
If you talk about
sacred power, this
is like the apex
of that position.
This is, like
Plato said, when he
said the gods are archetypes,
they live like Zeus
at the top of Mount
Olympus looking upon us,
but they are patterns of power.
A soul journey is the
journey with your soul.
It requires that you need
your soul to endure it,
emphasis on the word endure.
It is a make or break journey.
You will reach a
point in this journey
where you understand
you may not make it.
You may not make it.
I don't mean necessarily
that you may not live,
but you may not live well.
You may live this sense
that you are just surviving.
But if you decide, I've got
to heal this, no matter what,
and I've got to find resources
in me that I didn't know I had,
now the healer will
wake up in you.
And if you knew the story
of the wounded healer,
if at that moment,
you recognized,
oh my god, this is the arrow,
the first thing you would do
is forgive the one
who shot it to you.
The first is that you
would bow to that person
and say, thank you,
my journey's begun.
That's the first.
The second is that you would
detach from that person
and detach from how
the wound was given
and begin the walk in
gratitude that says, OK,
here's my fire walk.
I've got to make it to the end.
You would become impersonal
about the personal journey
given to you.
Why do you need to
know your archetypes?
Because you need this map.
Without the ability to
reference your own life
in the impersonal,
you won't make it.
It's never going to be easy.
But it won't be clear.
And you need that clarity.
You need soul clarity.
There is nothing like
soul clarity, nothing,
because the mind will
play tricks on you.
And the mind will say,
resent that person.
And what good will
that ever do you?
So let me tell you
about another archetype
you're going to relate
to, because we all
have the saboteur.
And you need to understand
the saboteur in you.
And like all
archetypes, it, too,
will visit you with a
journey because the role
of each archetype in
us is to educate us
on the nature of our own power.
Everything is always about our
power, everything, everything.
So put this jewel in
your little jewel pouch.
When you are in a situation
in your life, in a cloud,
in a fog, and you're not
sure what's going on,
and you need a reference,
there are a couple
of words I can
give you that will
be like candles in the night.
And the first word I'm
going to give you is power.
This situation,
even if I don't know
where I'm going, even if
I don't know what to do,
it has to do with power.
It has to do with my power.
And then the second thing
is you ask yourself,
where am I losing my power?
What has this got to do as a
test for my own empowerment?
You become
immediately impersonal
about your own life in that
second, immediately impersonal.
You detach from your own
life, just as if in order
to heal an illness,
your best position
is to become impersonal
about that illness.
It's not your cancer.
It is cancer.
That's all.
Nothing is personal.
Now, to understand
the saboteur, I
love teaching the
saboteur archetype.
I just love it because
everybody is always
wrong about what
they think it is.
And they think it's some
like ghoulish gargoyle that
comes out of somewhere, and
it's going to sabotage you,
and that is so not right.
The saboteur is a pattern
in us, and this pattern
is so consistent,
it is archetypal.
I know you do this.
I don't even know you,
and I know you do this.
And that's every
human being will
sabotage their own empowerment.
Now, in my workshops
people have said
to me for years and years
and years and years,
I am afraid of failure.
No.
No one's afraid of failure.
There is no such thing.
So check that off and get
that out of your head.
What people are afraid
of is responsibility.
They are afraid of empowerment.
And here's the mystery.
So what you get to say now
is, you're right Caroline,
I'm terrified of empowerment.
And now I'll
explain why you are.
It's because empowerment
is a different level
of consciousness.
People are afraid, intimidated
by becoming more conscious,
because it's all about truth.
Nobody's afraid of success.
What a ridiculous thing to say.
People are afraid of truth.
They're afraid of becoming
more able to see clearly,
because what that
does is it reduces
one's relationship with
darkness, with the capacity
to lie, with the capacity to
choose weakness over strength.
So we sabotage ourselves.
We sabotage.
When an opportunity to
empower ourselves comes along,
it's about, do I want to
empower myself to such a level
that I become able to see the
truth in my life that clearly?
Because there's no going back.
No, I think I'll
sabotage myself.
This is where people
blame their childhood.
So the reason you need
to know your saboteur
is you need to see
exactly how you
will sabotage your empowerment.
You have to ask
yourself, what is
it I don't want to see clearly?
You obviously see that I can
go on for years and years
about archetypes, and
I'm not kidding you.
But the next
natural question you
have for me is how do I
know my own archetypes?
So let me answer that
question for you.
That much I can do.
First of all, get this, you
should ask your friends,
because your friends already
can spot your patterns.
You can't keep your myths
or your archetypes hidden
from your friends
anymore than they
can keep them hidden from you.
But you already know a great
deal more about yourself
than you realize.
But I'll give you this clue.
Your archetypes are not
in your personality.
You know how many times
women will say-- usually it's
always women, that will pick
out archetypes in my workshops.
They'll say, I'm the queen.
And I'll say, why do you
think you're a queen?
And they'll say because I don't
like to be told what to do.
That's not a queen.
A queen is a noble force.
A queen is someone who takes
care of her responsibilities.
Stubborn is a bully.
Stubborn is a coward.
It's not a queen.
Your patterns are a
consistent behavior in you,
like if you're a
hermit, you know it.
You know it's what you crave.
Use the word crave
as a guidance.
You crave space.
You crave time alone.
You crave it
because you need it.
Now, don't think of all
these archetypes as negative.
Let me be very clear here.
An archetype is a
neutral pattern,
and yes, it has a shadow.
And the shadow means
it's just something
that is unknown about it.
It means that the part
of it that's unknown
is going to come out
in the unconscious.
So if, for example, I'm
going to take something that
sounds negative, like gossip.
If you're someone who can't
bear to see someone get ahead
of you, and your way of dealing
with that is to sabotage them
through gossip, and if I said
to you, why do you do that?
Why do you do that?
Why are you so intimidated by
the success of other people?
You might say, I don't know.
That's your shadow answering.
And then I would say to you,
you sit yourself down, missy,
because we're going to
get to the root of why you
don't know yourself that well.
You should be able to answer
every question about yourself
at your age.
And that's when you say to
me, I better go into my shadow
and figure that out.
And when you do, that part
of you that's the gossip
turns around and
becomes an asset.
You start writing
for newspapers,
you become Ann Landers.
And you use that skill,
because everything
has its powerful potential,
everything, absolutely
everything.
Now, you can spot
archetypes in our society,
and they define the
health and the direction
our society is moving in.
And I'll give you a clue.
You know the
vampire archetype is
a very toxic archetype,
an extraordinarily toxic
archetype.
And yet it's become popular.
The vampire is the archetype
that sucks the life out.
Your fifth chakra, it
bites you in the neck,
and it takes out the power
of choice, takes it out.
It is no coincidence
that the vampire is now
seen as romantic.
It's seen as something
people want to aspire to.
And so unconsciously,
the vampire archetype
is in our collective.
We don't know how to
language it literally,
but we are languaging it
in our collective this way.
Archetypes are the language
of our symbolic life.
And they are a map
into the patterns
that drive you inside yourself
and around, around you.
And so to know your
archetype is really
to have access to the map
of your soul, your soul,
and to understand
what drives you.
It is worth you
spotting your archetypes
and understanding that every
single archetype will pull out
of the shadow to move
you into the light.
That's how we're wired.
That, too, is archetypal.
We can't get away from it.
That's how heaven
has wired this,
because the journey is sacred.
And the wonderful thing is
we all have it in common,
there isn't one
person who is not
on this journey
of the maturation
of their archetypal instincts.
So when you think
about is it worth
knowing to put the time in,
think about know thyself,
and you will know your universe.
It is the truth.
Thank you.